# Reverse Turing Machine

Algorithm for running Turing Machines in reverse (to generate inputs rather than interpret them).

Traditionally, Turing Machines are run forwards: you start at an initial state (e.g. `start`) with a full tape. The tape is then consumed until a final state is reached (e.g. `valid`/`invalid`), at which point execution stops, and you have your result.

Running in reverse means the exact opposite: you start at a final state (e.g. `valid`) with an empty tape. The tape is then populated until an initial state is reached (e.g. `start`), at which point execution stops, and you have your input.

**Why do this?** To automatically derive input generators from predicates (has applications in testing frameworks).

## Exploring the repository

This repository is written in Scala (using Cats).

-   Turing machine ADT

    -   [Machine](src/main/scala/turing/Machine.scala) (contains the machine rules)

    -   [Machine Tape](src/main/scala/turing/Tape.scala) (contains input/output symbols)

    -   [Machine State](src/main/scala/turing/MachineState.scala) (either `Accept`, `Reject` or a user-defined intermediate state)

    -   [Machine Configuration](src/main/scala/turing/MachineConfiguration.scala) (contains the machine rules, tape and state)

-   Algorithms

    -   [Forward execution](src/main/scala/turing/Machine.scala#L28) (i.e. validating inputs).

    -   [Reverse execution](src/main/scala/turing/Machine.scala#L34) (i.e. generating inputs).

-   Examples:

    -   [Type-1 Grammar](src/test/scala/turing/TuringMachineSpec.scala#L21) (i.e. context-sensitive)

    -   [Type-2 Grammar](src/test/scala/turing/TuringMachineSpec.scala#L33) (i.e. context-free)

    -   [Type-3 Grammar](src/test/scala/turing/TuringMachineSpec.scala#L41) (i.e. regular)

_Note: these algorithms have been optimised, so forgive the occasional bit of non-FP code!_

## Getting started

The `scalacheck` tests assert the set of inputs generated by [our algorithm](src/main/scala/turing/Machine.scala#L34)
match the set of inputs generated by a hand-written generator for all 3 example predicates in the test suite.

```
sbt test
```

Using the algorithm is simple:

1.  Write a turing machine (`Machine[S, I, O]`) -- this is the [tedious part](src/test/scala/turing/TuringMachineSpec.scala#L222).

2.  Call `machine.generate()` to generate a sequence of inputs.

3.  Done!

## License

This software is licensed under the [MIT license](LICENSE).
